The metaphor of the information ecosystem is widely used in academic libraries and has become nearly ubiquitous when speaking of the information systems that support scholarly communication and varied forms of data sharing and publication. The trending use of this language arises from non-academic applications—for example in big data (the Hadoop ecosystem) or email (the Thunderbird ecosystem)—and there remains little critical examination of either how this metaphor influences (open) data management practices within the academy or how these practices and the data themselves impact the natural environment. Indeed, the definition of ecosystem as the set of relations between living organisms and their surrounding non-living environment is apparently not directly a part of the metaphor. This paper interrogates the usefulness and limits of this metaphor by asking such questions as what are the similarities between an (open) data assemblage and an ecosystem? How well do concepts such as connectedness, diversity, competition, stability, and evolution map between natural ecosystems and information ecosystems? And finally, what shared characteristics exist between the sustainable resource governance in ecosystem management and the management of (open) data? The paper describes the emergence of ecological thinking and how it is used in the information ecosystem metaphor. Then it explores how different "ecologies" are used within the academy and how they comingle with information ecology. The paper concludes that the information ecosystem metaphor is useful, yet at the same time there are dangerous elements that render critical aspects of human societies and natural ecosystems invisible.